# Lightway

Lightway is a modern VPN protocol in Rust, to deliver a VPN experience that’s faster, more secure, and more reliable.

## Structure

This repository contains multiple crates as follows:

 - lightway-core - Core VPN protocol library
 - lightway-client - Client application
 - lightway-server - Server application

In addition there is:

 - tests - dev and e2e test infrastructure

## Documentation

Protocol and design documentation can be found in the
[`docs`](docs/README.md) folder.


## Supported platforms

Lightway Rust implementation currently supports Linux OS. Both x86_64 and arm64 platforms are
supported and built as part of CI.

Support for other platforms will be added soon.

## Development steps

Lightway core and reference applications can be built using [Earthly](https://github.com/earthly/earthly)
without setting up the complete development environment locally.

Refer to [Earthly](https://docs.earthly.dev/) documentation on how to install earthly.

```bash
earthly +build
```

For running unit-tests,

```bash
earthly +test
```

To format code:
```bash
cargo fmt
```

For more information about the different Earthly targets available, run:
```bash
earthly doc
```

Note: Lightway can also be built using standard cargo tools

## Configuration

### Lightway-server

`Lightway-server` can be configured using config-file as follows:

```bash
lightway-server --config-file './tests/server/server_config.yaml'
```

[Example config file](./tests/server/server_config.yaml):

We can also override configs (except config-file), either by using env variables or by using cli arguments.
Env variables should have the prefix `LW_SERVER_`.
Cli arguments has the highest priority.

#### Authentication

Users are authenticated either using username and password or JWT
tokens. Both schemes may be used simultaneously but each connection is
authorized by one or the other (chosen by the client).

##### User / Password

A user database may be provided via the `user_db` option. This is in
a format compatible with Apache htpasswd files and so can be managed
using [`htpasswd(1)`][] or the tool of your choice.

The format is one user per line with username and password hash
separated by a colon, e.g.: `username:hash(password)`.

```console
$ htpasswd -B -c lwpasswd my_user
New password:
Re-type new password:
Adding password for user my_user
$ cat lwpasswd
my_user:$2y$05$V6da9E.ys3QUnhgAfSGm6eM5dhkHa6Oc90kKNpb8bmcCgPsreU7Sa
```

Note that only the hashes supported by the [`pwhash`][] crate are
supported and that this notably excludes the custom Apache MD5 hash
which `htpasswd(1)` uses by default. Use an option such as `-B`, `-2`
or `-5` to pick a different algorithm.

[`htpasswd(1)`]: https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/programs/htpasswd.html
[`pwhash`]: https://crates.io/crates/pwhash

> [!CAUTION]
> The widely used but basic `htpasswd(1)` username / password database format 
> was chosen here to provide an easy-to-setup reference implementation of 
> Lightway. Users of the open surce community are encouraged to modify this
> implementation with more advanced username / password authentication mechanisms
> and their own choice of password hashing algorithms to suit their security > needs. 

Please note that when providing env variables it should be in upper case and using "_" as a word separator,
while using as cli config, it should be in lower case with "-" as the word separator.

> [!CAUTION]
> Passing the `--password` option on the CLI will expose your password
> to other users on the system. It is recommended to provide the
> password via the configuration file or via `LW_CLIENT_PASSWORD`
> environment variable.

##### JWT Token

An RSA public key may be provided using the `token_rsa_pub_key_pem`
option. Any JWT (see [RFC 7519][]) with algorithm type "RS256" signed
with the corresponding private key will be authorized to connect.

The token's header must consist of at least:

```json
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}
```

The token's payload must contain at least a valid (in the future)
"exp" claim:

```json
{
  "exp": 123456789,
}
```

The keys and tokens can be generated by any RSA and JWT tooling.

For example:

- https://mkjwk.org/ can generate suitable key. Using "Show
  X.509" presents the public and private key in PEM format as required.
- https://jwt.io/ can then be used to generate individual
  tokens. (Note that by default the "alg" field is "HS256" not "RS256"
  as required here.

[RFC 7519]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519

#### Example:

```bash
LW_SERVER_LOG_LEVEL=trace lightway-server --config-file './tests/server/server_config.yaml'
```
The above command loads the config file and then overrides the log_level from env variable to `trace` level.

```bash
LW_SERVER_LOG_LEVEL=trace lightway-server --config-file './tests/server/server_config.yaml' --log-level=off
```
The above command loads the config file and then overrides the log_level from cli args to `off` level.
Since cli arguments have the highest priority, env variable config will be ignored.

### Lightway-client

`Lightway-client` can also be configured using config-file similar to `Lightway-server` as follows:

```bash
lightway-client --config-file './tests/client/client_config.yaml'
```

[Example config file](./tests/client/client_config.yaml):

Lightway-client also supports overriding the config using either env variables or cli arguments.
Env variables should have the prefix `LW_CLIENT_`.

By default the client will use the existing MTU on the tunnel device, this can be overridden with
the `--inside-mtu` option but note that this requires additional privileges, specifically the
`CAP_SYS_ADMIN` capability.

> [!CAUTION]
> Passing the `--password` option on the CLI will expose your password
> to other users on the system. It is recommended to provide the
> password via the configuration file or via `LW_CLIENT_PASSWORD`
> environment variable.

## E2E Testing

To run all e2e tests:
```bash
earthly --allow-privileged +e2e
```

Or to run a single e2e test:
```bash
earthly --allow-privileged ./tests+run-tcp-test
```

Check `tests/Earthfile` or `earthly doc ./tests` for other `run-*-test` targets.

To start the stack for your own testing:
```bash
earthly -P ./tests/+save-all-test-containers  && SERVER_ARGS="--config-file server_config.yaml" CLIENT_ARGS="--config-file client_config.yaml" docker compose -f tests/e2e/docker-compose.yml up
```

Then you can use e.g.

```
docker compose -f tests/e2e/docker-compose.yml exec client bash
```

To run things within the containers

## Contributing

We appreciate feedback and contribution to this repository! Before you get started, please see link:

[CONTRIBUTING](./CONTRIBUTING.adoc)

## Reporting a vulnerability

To report security vulnerabilities, please see section on link:

[Reporting a vulnerability](SECURITY.adoc#reporting-a-vulnerability)

## Dev-Testing

For running both client and server in the same machine and test end to end, follow these steps:

```bash
export LW_DANGEROUSLY_DISABLE_PERMISSIONS_CHECKS=1
```

Configuration files must be trustworthy (per [`fs-mistrust`'s
definition][]) but many path elements are owned by the user while the
tests are run as root via sudo. For dev test we disable those checks.

[`fs-mistrust`'s definition]: https://docs.rs/fs-mistrust/latest/fs_mistrust/index.html

Then:

```bash
sudo ./tests/setup.sh
```

The above script by default creates four network namespaces:
    - lightway-server
    - lightway-middle
    - lightway-client
    - lightway-remote

The lightway-remote namespace simulates "The Internet". Run any services which you'd like the client to access over the tunnel here.

The lightway-middle namespace facilitates a multi-hop network path: client <-> middle <-> server. Settings can be modified in the middle namespace to simulate interesting network conditions (e.g. lower path MTU, see below)

Start server using this command,
```bash
cargo build --bin lightway-server && sudo -E ip netns exec lightway-server ./target/debug/lightway-server --config-file './tests/server/server_config.yaml'
```

Start client using this command,
```bash
cargo build --bin lightway-client && sudo -E ip netns exec lightway-client ./target/debug/lightway-client --config-file './tests/client/client_config.yaml' --server server:27690
```

Then enter into `lightway-client` namespace and trying pinging google.com
```bash
sudo ip netns exec lightway-client bash
ping google.com -c 3
```

Verify `wan` interface in `lightway-remote` namespace receiving the packet and replying:
```bash
sudo ip netns exec lightway-remote bash
tcpdump -i wan -nvvl
```

Run `wireshark` within a network namespace:
```bash
sudo -E ip netns exec lightway-client su -c wireshark $USER
```

Change the client's source address:
```bash
sudo ip netns exec lightway-client ip addr add 192.168.0.3/24 dev veth
sudo ip netns exec lightway-client ip addr del 192.168.0.2/24 dev veth
```

To cleanup the test setup after testing, use
```bash
sudo ./tests/setup.sh delete
```
> Note: This will work only on linux machine with kernel supporting network namespaces.
> And sudo permission is required to run all netns commands

To setup multiple additional namespaces:
```bash
sudo env EXTRA_CLIENTS=3 ./tests/setup.sh
```

Will create `lightway-client1`, `lightway-client2` and
`lightway-client3` in addition to the base `lightway-client`.

To test Path MTU Discovery (UDP only) you can set the second hop MTU
with e.g.

```bash
sudo ip netns exec lightway-middle ip link set mtu 1300 dev veth-s2m
sudo ip netns exec lightway-server ip link set mtu 1300 dev veth-s2m
```

### Testing with PROXY protocol enabled

Lightway server supports the [PROXY protocol][] via the
`proxy_protocol` configuration option.

In the containerized test environment this can be tested by running a
proxy protocol frontend.

For example using https://pypi.org/project/proxy-protocol/ to proxy
from TCPv4 port 443 to a lightway server listening on TCPv6 localhost:

```bash
python3 -m venv --prompt proxy-protocol proxy-protocol
./proxy-protocol/bin/pip3 install proxy-protocol
sudo ip netns exec lightway-server ./proxy-protocol/bin/proxyprotocol-server --service 0.0.0.0:443 '[::1]:443'
```

Then configure lightway-server with `bind_address: [::1]:443` and
`proxy_protocol: true`. The client can connect to `server:443` via
TCPv4 as usual.

[PROXY protocol]: https://www.haproxy.org/download/1.8/doc/proxy-protocol.txt

## Speeding up development with Earthly Satellites

Please refer to [official documentation for Earthly Satellites](https://docs.earthly.dev/earthly-cloud/satellites).

If you are a member of ExpressVPN, you can get access to the same Earthly organization used in our CI. The organization is named `expressvpn`, inside which contains a satellite named `lightway`.

If you are not a member of ExpressVPN, you may set up your own Earthly satellite according the official instructions above.

## Debugging

### Decrypting TLS1.3 data packets

`Lightway-client` supports creating a keylog file, which can be used in Wireshark for decrypting the TLS1.3 data traffic.
Note that this is supported only with feature `debug` enabled.

For example:

```bash
cargo run --features debug --bin lightway-client -- --config-file=tests/client_conf.yaml --keylog "/tmp/client.log"

```

The resulting file can then be exported to Wireshark to decrypt data traffic. The following wireshark documentations explains about exporting keylog file:

https://www.wireshark.org/docs/wsug_html_chunked/ChIOExportSection.html#ChIOExportTLSSessionKeys
https://wiki.wireshark.org/TLS#using-the-pre-master-secret

### WolfSSL debug logging

Both `lightway-client` and `lightway-server` support a `--tls-debug`
option when built with their respective `debug` feature enabled. This
enables WolfSSL's debug logging.
